docs: Quiescence Document (#25749)
hashgraph/hedera-services: platform-sdk/docs/consensus-layer/architecture/topics/quiescence.md

- Does not own: the quiescence **conditions** — the transaction counting,
  signature-transaction filtering, and Target Consensus Timestamp (TCT)
  tracking that decide the command. These are Execution concerns
  (`QuiescenceController` and friends in `hedera-node/hedera-app`), out of
  scope here; see
  [`../interfaces/consensus-execution-boundary.md`](../interfaces/consensus-execution-boundary.md).
- Does not own: gossip, which continues unchanged while quiescing (see
  [Behaviour during quiescence](#behaviour-during-quiescence)); event
  intake, likewise unchanged; the freeze procedure, which today stops event
  creation through its own mechanism, separate from quiescence (see
  [`freeze-and-upgrade.md`](freeze-and-upgrade.md)).

One cross-boundary contract supports Execution's counting and is worth
naming here: every pre-consensus event the consensus layer hands to
Execution must eventually be reported back as either a consensus event or
a stale event, so that Execution's transaction counter stays balanced.
Consensus is the central point that reports stale events. The mechanics of
that contract belong to [`../../concepts/stale-events.md`](../../concepts/stale-events.md);

> quiescence relies on it but does not define it.

Reviewer: There is a little bit more here that I think needs to be described. The restart case is quite tricky. Many events will be fed into the consensus algorithm while looking for judges. Once judges are found, any events that reached consensus in that round as marked as consensus - these events are not returned as pre-consensus events to the execution layer. All events that did not reach consensus in that round must be included in pre-consensus events sent to the execution layer.

Maybe the scope of this document should be expanded to include this, because the interface was changed specifically to support quiescence and if there is a bug in this interface, quiescence will not work properly.

Author: I am unsure if this belongs here. While this functionality was introduced for quiescence, it is now part of the general contract between the consensus and execution layers. It may easily be overlooked. Let's discuss.

Author: As discussed, I added a section about this functionality in the boundary document.

transactions does not change consensus behaviour directly; it is Execution
that observes the new work and responds by sending `DONT_QUIESCE` (or
`BREAK_QUIESCENCE`), which is what actually resumes creation.

### Platform status

A quiescing node holds platform status `ACTIVE`; no dedicated quiescence
status exists. The mechanism:
[`DefaultPlatformMonitor`](../../../../swirlds-platform-core/src/main/java/com/swirlds/platform/system/DefaultPlatformMonitor.java)`#heartbeat`
stamps each `TimeElapsedAction` with a
[`TimeElapsedAction.QuiescingStatus`](../../../../swirlds-platform-core/src/main/java/com/swirlds/platform/system/status/actions/TimeElapsedAction.java)
record (`isQuiescing = lastQuiescenceCommand == QUIESCE`, plus the instant
the command last changed). In
[`ActiveStatusLogic`](../../../../swirlds-platform-core/src/main/java/com/swirlds/platform/system/status/logic/ActiveStatusLogic.java)`#processTimeElapsedAction`,
while `isQuiescing` is true the node stays `ACTIVE` regardless of how long
it has been since one of its own events reached consensus — which would
otherwise drop it to `CHECKING`.

## Exit

The consensus layer leaves quiescence when a new command supersedes

> `QUIESCE`. There are two shapes, both routed exactly as in

Reviewer: There it is again, use of "shapes" in a strange way

Author: Fixed

by where the necessary knowledge lives. To consensus, a transaction is
opaque bytes; only Execution can tell a user transaction from a
block- or state-signature transaction, and signature transactions must be
excluded or the network would never settle (each signed block produces more
signatures to sign). Concentrating the conditions in Execution also keeps
the consensus / execution boundary small: a single command rather than
several new cross-module touchpoints.

The choice not to introduce a dedicated quiescence platform status was made
because the status enum is already a single, heavily-relied-upon flag, with
much of the system keying off `ACTIVE`. Adding a quiescing state caused the
status transitions to multiply and produced awkward combinations (a node
that creates no events would otherwise drift into `CHECKING`, which
operators read as a fault). Keeping a quiescing node `ACTIVE` and carrying
the quiescence signal alongside the status, rather than inside it, avoided
that.

Finally, the quiescence-breaker exception exists for one specific
deadlock: if a single node receives a transaction while every peer is
quiescing, the tipset algorithm — which normally insists that a new

> event advance consensus — would leave that node unable to create any

Reviewer: _could_ leave that node unable to create any event, not _would_

Author: Fixed

> event, and the transaction would strand. The quiescence-breaker is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
event, and the transaction would be stranded. The quiescence-breaker is the
```

Author: Fixed
